TALLINN UNIVERSITY
SCHOOL OF HUMANITIES


















Ieva Lange
XXXXX: Practices of Divestment, Acquisition and Circulation of Things in a swapshop in Riga, Latvia

MA Thesis






















Supervisor professor/associate professor/lecturer Maarja Kaaristo, Joonas Plaan





Tallinn 2026
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION

The concept of a swapshop
2. Circulation, Practice, and Consumption Work: A Theoretical Framework
This chapter develops a theoretical framework for the thesis, connecting several bodies of work: a practice-theoretical approach to consumption with a focus not only on acquisition and attachment, but also divestment and disposal; theories of practice and their application to the study of goods circulation; quiet sustainability as a way of understanding sustainable practices that are not articulated as such by their practitioners; and consumption work as a framework for naming the labour that circulation demands and examining how it is distributed.
2.1. Theories of Practice
The central theoretical grounding for this thesis is practice theory  – or rather theories of practice – a heterogeneous cluster of approaches in humanities and social sciences in which practice serves as the primary unit of analysis for understanding human life and sociality. Shifting away from individual motivations and behaviours, for example, questions on why people intend and choose to do what they do, practice theory rather examines how those doings are organized socially. It enables looking at the interconnectedness of the social and material realms with an emphasis on the role of objects, infrastructures and technology in practice enactment and maintenance. Evolved in a lineage from Bourdieu and Giddens in social sciences, in the past decades theories of practice have been influential and applied across various domains in social sciences and humanities, constituting what has been called a practice turn.
While varied definitions of social practice exist, Warde (2005) suggests a minimal definition: “An organized, and recognizable, socially shared bundle of activities that involves the integration of a complex array of components: material, embodied, ideational and affective. Practices are sets of ‘doings and sayings’; they involve both practical activity and its representations" (Warde 2005: 134).
Different frameworks have been articulated to account for the elements constituting practices. A particularly influential contribution, especially in anthropological approaches to practice, is the work of Elisabeth Shove, Mika Pantzar and Matt Watson (2012) in which the authors offer a deliberately compact three-component framework for analysing practices. Shove and colleagues define a practice element frame consisting of meanings, materials, and competences.
“Meanings” refer to the ideas, aspirations, shared understandings and related values that give practice its purpose and make it intelligible for practitioners and guide how practices are performed. “Materials” refer to objects involved and used in practice, necessary technologies and infrastructure through which practices are enacted. It also refers to bodies and physicality. “Competences” are the skills (across cognitive and physical realms) and practical knowledge necessary for participation in a practice, including understanding how to use objects, follow rules, and navigate social norms.
[Par rules kā vienu no elementiem: RULES: (piemēram, “Lifestyles of enough: Exploring sufficiency lifestyle from spt perspective) I take rules as part of the competency dimension.
Rules as a fourth dimension of social practices have so far not been taken up by most scholars. Gram-Hanssen (2010: 155) criticizes that the element “competences” is “overly simple, as the authors do not distinguish between […] know-how or non-verbal knowledge and explicit, rule-based, or theoretical knowledge”. Other perspectives suggest that rules are part of the material or the competence dimension. The importance of rules should, however, be considered in an analysis of consumption practices (Giddens, 1984; Warde, 2005). In this paper, I consider rules as formal, institutionalized, and explicit rules (Gram-Hanssen, 2010). Informal rules are accounted for by the dimensions of know-how, and/or meaning, depending on the context.]
This threefold structure of elements of practice has been used widely across disciplines as it offers a clear conceptual and methodological approach for empirical research. The authors acknowledge that the model sacrifices some nuance to analytical clarity, yet argue that it is analytically productive, especially for studying how practices change and develop when their elements are reconfigured. It allows looking at practices as entities with their own histories and trajectories – recruiting or losing practitioners, appearing and disappearing – which can be distinguished from practices as performances: the specific, recurrent enactments through which practices are reproduced or transformed. Transformation and change comes through  recombination of the elements of practice (Shove et al. 2012).
Delineating a practice and setting it apart from adjacent practices is a central challenge in practice theory, as there are no fixed procedural rules for determining exactly where one practice ends and another begins. Nicolini (2017: 26-27) notes that, while for analytical purposes, practices can be conceived and examined individually, empirically they are always encountered in arrays and multiplicities. Practices “hang together” in bundles and complexes (Shove et al. 2012), distinguished by the density and “stickiness” of their patterns. Practice bundles refer to the more loose-knit relations between practices, often gathered around the same site or time – practices that are related and shape each other but not strongly, whereas complexes refer to more integrated combinations that can also constitute new practice entities if the relations are significantly dense. When practitioners talk about what they do, often some practices are fore-grounded and others are left in the background (Nicolini 2017: 26-27).
2.2. Consumption practices
Practice theories have been widely applied in studies of sustainability and consumption. Whereas previously widespread theories of consumption in the 1980s and 1990s often treated it as a matter of individual choice and identity-making (reference to illustrate these approaches), theories of practice enabled attending to consumption patterns that emerge from the practices in which people are engaged, rather than from their preferences or intentions. This decentring of the individual marked a significant departure from both the rational-choice models of consumer behaviour research and the identity-focused approaches of consumer culture theory (reference).
Warde’s (2005) paper “Consumption and theories of practice” is widely regarded as the first programmatic application of practice theory to consumption studies (Welch & Warde 2015). Its central contribution was to reconceptualise consumption as "not itself a practice but rather a moment in almost every practice" (Warde 2005: 137). Warde conceptualizes consumption not as a separate domain of social life organised around the acquisition of goods, but as an integral component of social practices through which people organize their daily lives. People consume in the course of doing other things: maintaining a household, raising children, managing seasonal change, responding to gifts received, keeping warm, eating, moving around.  As Warde (2005: 146) puts it, from this perspective “the concept of ‘the consumer’ ... evaporates. Instead the key focal points become the organization of the practice and the moments of consumption enjoined.”
There is also a particular affinity between consumption and sustainability studies. Welch and Warde (2015) identify three reasons for it. Firstly, because of the large environmental impacts of inconspicuous consumption of energy and resources in the use of goods and services for everyday routine tasks, for example, showering, doing the laundry as discussed by Shove (2010). [reword, unclear] For such inconspicuous, resource intensive practices analysis of consumption as symbolic display and presentation of self that was more prevalent in consumption studies before is less relevant than attention to the material and social arrangements that sustain them. Secondly, because goods and services are primarily used for the accomplishment of social practices rather than for consumption per se. Thirdly, practice theory can provide a way out of discussions of the “value–action” gap – the persistent discrepancy between reportedly pro-environmental values which by contrast are not reflected in a person’s behaviour – by redirecting focus on the ways resource intensive practices capture and retain their practitioners.
As a processual approach, practice theory directs attention to dynamics and trajectories of practices: how they emerge, stabilize, recruit practitioners, and change over time. Warde (2014: 297) observes, however, that practice theoretic approaches “may need supplementing with other frameworks, particularly to capture macro-level or structural aspects of consumption”. Evans (2020) develops this point, noting that the ways practice theory has been applied has been useful to elucidate the use of commodities within everyday practices but less equipped to address the institutional and systemic conditions that organise those practices.  [..]
This thesis aligns with practice theoretical perspectives on sustainable consumption that attent to the full cycle of goods through domestic life – considering not only the goods and materials people acquire, but also divestment and disposal (Ehgartner and Holmes, 2022, Evans, 2019). For example, Evans (2020) responds to this by proposing an expanded definition of consumption as a process involving multiple moments beyond acquisition. Following Warde (2005), he identifies appropriation – the use, personalisation, and incorporation of goods into everyday life – and appreciation – the personal and symbolic frameworks through which goods are evaluated and enjoyed. To these he adds three further moments: devaluation, the loss of economic or symbolic value; divestment, the loss of personal meaning and the unravelling of attachments; and disposal, the physical act of getting rid of things (Evans 2020: 345). Taken together, these six moments constitute consumption as a full cycle rather than a single event. Evans notes that a case could be made for simplifying this further, though – replacing the three acquisition related moments with a single concept of attachment, and the three divestment related moments with detachment ¬ a formulation that captures the emotional and relational dimensions of both acquiring and letting go (Evans, 2020: 347).
This expanded definition of consumption to include detachment (divestment, disposal) is at the basis of this thesis. Brīvbode can thus be understood as a consumption site in both directions: people come to divest and dispose of goods that have reached the end of their household life, and they come to acquire goods that may be entering a new phase of their biography. The swapshop is a node in the ordinary circulation of goods through domestic life, distinguished by its non-monetary character and physical permanence.

2.3. Theories of Practice to Study Alternative Practices?
Practice theory, as developed by Elisabeth Shove, was developed primarily to analyze stable, widely shared, and largely unreflective practices in everyday domestic routines (Shove 2003, 2012), particularly the inconspicuous consumption of energy and resources in affluent Western societies that drives resource use beyond planetary boundaries. Shove has even argued that “investigations into the beliefs and actions of self-confessed environmentalists represent something of a distraction. What counts is the big, and in some cases, global swing of ordinary, routinized and taken-for-granted practice…” (Shove, 2003: 9).
Yet as Welch and Warde (2015) note, this strategic move away from environmentalists’ motivations has come at a cost, leading to a neglect of the cultural dimensions of sustainable consumption (Spaargaren 2013 - [need to check this paper - Ieva]). Other authors have argued for a greater attention to non-hegemonic practices that serve as alternatives to mass consumption (e.g. Speck and Hasselkuss 2015). Practice theories are useful here too, as a tool for understanding how more sustainable alternatives might become normalised or integrated into existing consumption routines.
Freecycling at Brīvbode sits at an interesting angle in this argument – it has both conventional and unconventional elements. It is not a widely shared, fully stabilised routine practice in Shove’s sense. Yet the practices it draws on – household divestment, secondhand acquisition, sequential use of goods – are not unusual in Riga or Latvia; what is less common is their organisation within a permanent, volunteer-run, non-monetary exchange site.
Most participants do not come to Brīvboe because of self-professed environmental conviction. They come for practical, habitual and social reasons. This resonates with Smith and Jehlička’s (2013) concept on quiet sustainability, developed through research on Czech urban gardeners: sustainable practices that are widespread and effective but not articulated in terms of sustainability by their practitioners. Latvia provides a productive context for this concept – several participants trace their orientations towards reuse and frugality to generational experience rather than any sustainability agenda.
Some participants do frame their participation in explicit sustainability terms, though, and this difference should not be overlooked. The thesis holds both the quiet and the articulated dimensions without collapsing them into a single category, treating the variation between them as empirically interesting. In practice-theoretical terms, however, what practitioners say about why they do what they do is only one element of practice — doings hold the centre.
Practices of divestment are also changing, shaped by new infrastructure and policy developments – Latvia introduced mandatory textile collection in 2024, and new secondhand platforms and practices are expanding the routes available for household goods. A study of Brīvbode contributes to understanding this changing practice landscape by offering an empirical account of one specific site where divestment, acquisition, and non-monetary exchange come together, at a particular moment in the development of circular consumption practices in Latvia.

2.4. Following the commodity trajectories: the swapshop between commodification and decommodification
Practice theory, as Evans (2020) observes, has tended to move away from a concern with commodities and commodification, focusing instead on how goods are used within practices rather than on how they acquire and lose value as they circulate. A focus on commodity biographies is a useful way to connect practice theoretic accounts of consumption to broader economic activities. [Revisit Evans 2020 to see how exactly?]
“In contrast, the various contributions to Arjun Appaduari’s landmark collection (1986) The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective focus on how objects are made – both materially and semiotically – as commodities. The core idea is that objects move and circulate between ‘regimes of value’ such that they have cultural biographies (Kopytoff, 1986). It follows that studying ‘things-in-motion’ can illuminate their ‘human and social context’ (Appadurai, 1986: 5).
The approach of ‘following the thing’ could usefully be extended to encompass a focus on processes of consumption beyond the moment of acquisition. Doing so could result in more integrated and comprehensive accounts of commodification and de-commodification than are currently offered by the production-bias of existing commodity biographies. Accepting that qualities and qualification are useful concepts for thinking across production and consumption, I suggest that following the thing is a promising methodological tool for empirically accessing these processes. (Evans, 2020: 348)
Things in swapshop: not waste, not commodity, not gift in a classic sense.
Decommodification refers to the process by which goods or services that are typically bought and sold in a market economy are removed from the realm of market exchange, becoming accessible without monetary transactions, or are endowed with meanings and values that go beyond their exchange value. Brīvbode is a clear example of decommodification. Goods that would normally be exchanged for money are instead offered freely. Participants bring items they no longer need and take items they find useful, removing these goods from the traditional market.
2.5. Consumption Work
If practice theory explains how the circulation of goods is socially organised, consumption work names what that circulation costs. Practice theory’s focus on competencies – the skills and know-how through which practices are enacted – tends to emphasize how things are done rather than the effort and resources required to do them. Labor-centric views (e.g. through the concepts of consumption work or care work) instead highlight the laborious aspects of these practices, including the work of acquiring, managing, and disposing of goods and can address this gap directly. This is important in order to examine how circular consumption create responsibilities and in what ways new forms of consumption work are distributed through populations.
Wheeler and Glucksmann (2015) contend that secondhand markets involve consumption work – sorting, cleaning, repairing. ‘Consumption work’, for them, refers to the range of tasks required of consumers, before or after they consume, on which consumption itself is predicated – the work that must be done before or after the moment of exchange for consumption to be possible at all. Their framework encompasses technical dimensions – the allocation of tasks and skills to different people; modal dimensions – interdependencies of work across different social and economic arrangements; and processual dimensions – the connections of labour across the full span of a consumption process (Wheeler & Gluckmann, 2015: 35-36). In circular economy contexts, Hobson et al. (2021) argue, this work intensifies: responsible divestment requires more effort than simply throwing things away, and the additional demands fall disproportionately on those who are already doing most of the household management work.
Beswick-Parsons, Evans and Jackson (2025), in a recent study of household reuse practices, identify specific forms of consumption work involved in everyday circular consumption – decanting, stock management, recirculating – and argue that reuse practices are more prevalent and more varied than existing policy commentary assumes. Their analysis provides empirical precedent for examining consumption work and for attending to the range of tasks that participation in reuse practices requires. They conclude that future transitions to reuse might depend less on establishing new practices, driven by narratives of green consumerism, but rather greater attention should be paid to wider changes, including the transformation of supply chains to align with and facilitate the range of ‘reuse work’ currently observed within everyday domestic spaces.
This thesis extends the consumption work framework in two directions. First, it examines consumption work at a semi-public site rather than within the domestic sphere. In discussion of research agenda for circular economies Hobson et al. (2021) call explicitly for research that moves beyond the household to examine how consumption work is organised and distributed in community and public spaces. Brīvbode is such a space: a site where the ordinarily private labour of divestment and acquisition becomes briefly visible and socially acknowledged, and a site where also public volunteer labor – sorting, curating, maintaining quality standards, managing social dynamics – sustains a service, itself a form of consumption work that is continuous with the domestic labour it serves.
“Recent research at the intersection of practice theory and circular consumption has begun to foreground the labour involved in sustaining material circulation. Drawing on a practice-theoretical approach, Réka Tölg shows that circular consumption – particularly in the context of clothing – relies on the ongoing enactment of care in everyday practices. This involves not only acquiring and using garments, but also maintaining, repairing, and eventually parting with them in ways that enable their continued circulation. Such practices require the development of skills, awareness, and a sense of responsibility, and are often shaped by socio-material arrangements in both household and retail contexts. At the same time, Tölg highlights that these practices are not straightforward to accomplish, but are characterised by tensions, dilemmas, and constraints within systems still largely organised around linear consumption. In this sense, circular consumption can be understood not as a simple behavioural shift, but as an ongoing accomplishment that entails effort, coordination, and engagement – what has been conceptualised elsewhere as “consumption work” (Hobson et al., 2021).”
[Maarja] I think it could be highlighted more / better, for example some of it could move to introduction. Some could go to the conclusion of this chapter.

Second, the thesis attends to the gendered distribution of this work. Miller’s (1998) ethnographic research on shopping demonstrated that consumption is often organised around care for others, and that women often function as moral agents in household consumption. Shopping and consumption practices can be seen as acts of care, where people choose items with loved ones in mind, reflecting their role in family and social networks.
[Second hand source that I should check] (Lindsay et al. 2024) Lindsay et al. (2024) and Organo et al. (2013) find that women consistently spend more time on sustainable household practices than men, and that “sustainability labour” tends to be more absorbed into existing patterns of gendered domestic work rathe than redistributed.
The labor of managing excess – the sorting, the deciding, the transporting, the emotional work of letting go – falls unevenly on people, is often invisible, and becomes especially visible in circular economy contexts. Participation in Brīvbode is a form of consumption work, and understanding it as such reveals both what the swapshop enables and what it demands. Consumption work in the context of the swapshop: the effort of finding, sorting, or repurposing items, as well as the broader social practices around bringing and taking items from Brīvbode – decluttering, home organising, dealing with the needs of family members.
Consumption work and practice theory in this thesis are complementary rather than competing frameworks. Following the argument developed above in section 2.2., consumption work describes what practices demand from their carriers rather than what individuals choose to do. The labour is in the practice; the questions of what kind of labour and who bears it are questions about the social organisation of practice and whose bodies and time it recruits.
[Also I would like to specify somewhere how, while overlapping, domestic labour and consumption (including divestment) work are not the same.]
2.6. Conclusion
This thesis brings together practice-theoretical perspectives on sustainable consumption and consumption work for a study of non-domestic node of goods circulation within a context of non-monetary exchange. Brīvbode is a site where the ordinarily private and dispersed practices of domestic material life become visible. The continued existence of the swapshop — sustained through regular volunteer labour, participant labour, and a relatively stable social and material infrastructure – can be read as evidence of the demand that household goods circulation generates: a demand for routes of divestment that, while taking some degree of effort, are socially acknowledged.
Whether freecycling constitutes a practice in its own right, or remains a cluster of moments within larger practice bundles of divestment, acquisition, and domestic management, is a question that will be addressed in the next empirical chapters. People are navigating a material and social world that generates excess faster than any individual practice of divestment can manage. This thesis is an ethnographic study of a swapshop to investigate how these spaces foster alternative consumption practices that possibly challenge capitalist logics of ownership and value.

LITERATURE
Appadurai, A. (Ed.). (1986). "The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective." Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Beswick-Parsons, R., Evans, D. M., Jackson, P. (04 Sep 2025) Reuse practices and household consumption work. Social & Cultural Geography
Ehgartner, U., Holmes, H. (2022) ‘Changing understandings of waste reduction and avoidance in moralities of thrift: A comparison of Mass Observers’ narratives three decades apart’, Geoforum, 137, 105–114.
Evans, D. (2020). After practice? Material semiotic approaches to consumption and economy. Cultural Sociology, 14(4), 340–356.
Evans, D., D. McMeekin, A., Warde, A. (Ed.), & Southerton, D. (Ed.) (2012). Sustainable Consumption, Behaviour Change Policies and Theories of Practice. In The Habits of Consumption: COLLeGIUM: Studies across Disciplines in the Humanities and Social Sciences (Vol. 12, pp. 113-129). (Open Access Book Series of the Helsinki Collegium of Advanced Studies). University of Helsinki.
Hobson, K., Holmes, H., Welch, D., Wheeler, K., & Wieser, H. (2021). "Consumption Work in the Circular Economy: A Research Agenda." Journal of Cleaner Production, 321, 128969.
Miller, D. (1998) The Comfort of Things (2008), A Theory of Shopping.
Shove, E. (2003). Comfort, Cleanliness and Convenience: The Social Organization of Normality. Berg.
Shove, E., Pantzar, M., & Watson, M. (2012). The Dynamics of Social Practice: Everyday Life and How it Changes. Sage.
Shove, E., & Walker, G. (2010). “Governing Transitions in the Sustainability of Everyday Life.” Research Policy, 39(4), 471-476.
Smith, J., & Jehlička, P. (2013). Quiet sustainability: Fertile lessons from Europe’s productive gardeners. Journal of Rural Studies, 32, 148–157.
Speck, M., Hasselkuss, M., 2015. Sufficiency in social practice: searching potentials for sufficient behavior in a consumerist culture. Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy 11, 14–32.
Warde, A. (2005). "Consumption and Theories of Practice." Journal of Consumer Culture, 5(2), 131–153.
Warde, A. (2004). "Practice and Field: Revising Bourdieusian Concepts." Sociological Review, 52(S1), 60–74.
Warde, A., & Southerton, D. (2012). "The Habits of Consumption." Helsinki: Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies.
Welch, D. and Warde, A. (2015) “Theories of Practice and Sustainable Consumption”, in Reisch, L. and Thøgersen, J. (eds.) Handbook of Research on Sustainable Consumption, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp.84-100

PIEVIENOT
consumption as a middle class sustainability “issue”?
A central conclusion is that textile disposal has become normalized. –
“Sustainability transitions in textiles therefore require systemic reconfiguration of what is considered ‘normal’ in household practices.”
this dissertation conceptualizes disposal as a material, cultural, and social practice central to consumption, rather than a peripheral or undesirable act.
Disposal is treated not simply as the act of discarding but as a meaningful practice that enables and intersects with the reproduction of broader everyday activities.
In sociology, the study of consumption has evolved through three major phases: an early focus on economistic models prior to the 1980s; the ‘cultural turn’ of the early 1980s, which emphasized meaning-making, identity, and symbolic value; and, more recently, a ‘practice turn’ that reorients attention toward the routines, materialities, and shared norms of everyday life (Warde, 2014, 2015).
in clothing consumption research consumption of clothing is viewed as a habitual and socially embedded activity rather than a constant, deliberate process of choice and identity construction (Chamberlin & Callmer, 2021; Miller & Woodward, 2012; van der Laan & Velthuis, 2016).
“In their classical taxonomy for describing consumer disposition behavior, Jacoby et al. (1977) illustrated that disposal may involve keeping, donating, selling, recycling, or throwing away, and even within each category, multiple practices exist. Disposal is thus not inherently destructive or wasteful and cannot be reduced to simply ‘throwing something away’, but is an active social practice embedded in ethical, cultural, and material contexts (Hetherington, 2004). This perspective recognizes disposal as an active, meaning-making practice. As Gregson et al. (2007b) argue, divestment is not simply a negative or absent moment in consumer life, but a practice that enables other practices. To sustain certain routines and identities, other objects must be removed. In this sense, disposal us not the final step in a linear production-consumption-waste chain but a recursive moment that helps reorder consumption itself (Gregson et al., 2007a; Hetherington, 2004). Following Douglas (2002), disposal can be seen as part of the ‘ordering work’ of everyday life, where waste becomes threatening not by its material properties but by its symbolic disruptions of social and domestic order (Gregson et al., 2007a; Heidenstrøm & Hebrok, 2021).”
“What we discard reflects who we are but also helps constitute who we become. In this way, waste is both expressive and constitutive of identity (Lucy, 2023).”
Maldini et al. (2019), for instance, found that garments are often retained long after they stop being worn, while new items are added without replacing old ones, highlighting the entanglement with disposal and accumulation. Furthermore, as with disposal in general, textile disposal is not merely a matter of getting rid of unwanted things, nor is it a straightforward or linear process.

Sigaard, A.S. (2026) Want Not, Waste Not: A Practice-Theoretical Study of Textile Disposal in Everyday Life. PhD thesis. Oslo Metropolitan University.
“This theoretical approach shifts the analytical focus away from individual behavior to practices allowing textile waste to be understood not as the outcome of isolated decisions but as a meaningful and situated activity embedded in everyday domestic routines.”
“Social phenomena are understood as emerging from, and being embedded within, interconnected networks of practices and the materials that sustain them (Schatzki, 2019).”
“Dressing is viewed as a dynamic, lifelong everyday practice comprised of three interdependent elements: materials (e.g., clothing, wardrobes, washing machines), meanings (e.g., symbolic notions such as cleanliness or fashion), and competences (e.g., dressing, laundering, repairing skills) (Maguire & Fahy, 2022; Skjold, 2016).”
“Textile disposal is conceptualized as a social practice embedded within everyday routines and shaped by normative expectations, identity work, and material needs.”
Schatzki’s site ontology
“The deep interdependence between practices and material arrangements is a central theme in Schatzki’s site ontology. According to Schatzki (2002), a social site is not merely a spatial backdrop for action, but a constitutive milieu where social life unfolds across three interrelated dimensions. First, the site refers to the basic location where something happens, whether spatial, temporal, or relational. Second, it represents the broader thematic or systemic context in which specific practices are embedded. Third, the site encompasses a deeper, constitutive context that gives practices their social meaning. In social sites, actions are seldom shaped by a single practice alone but emerge from the complex interaction of multiple overlapping practices.”
​​For example, textile disposal emerges from the intersection of multiple practices, such as cleaning, organizing, shopping, and caring, even when disposal appears as the main activity.

Shove conceptualizes material entities as one of the core elements of practice, alongside meanings and competences (Shove et al., 2012; Shove et al., 2007). Acknowledging the different roles that material entities can play, three categories of materiality are proposed: resources (consumables used up in practices), devices (objects directly mobilized during practices), and infrastructure (supporting systems not directly engaged) (Shove, 2016).



3. FREECYCLING RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
A short one paragraph introduction describing what this chapter will be about.
Fieldwork gives access to performances; interviews give access to how participants make sense of those performances; together they allow claims about practices as entities.
3.1. Ethnography of Practice
[Maarja – This subchapter details your research methodology - which is ethnography - and relates it to practice theory. It’s good but also add a bit more on ethnography, e.g. define it using methodological literature. Right now the section is only focusing on practice theory]
Ethnographic participation enabled me to note finer details about the initiative.
Rather than offering a fixed methodological recipe, practice theories, as Nicolini (2017: 26) puts it, should be conceived as “a theoretical orientation towards the study of the social, where the methodological element remains central”. Various strands of practice theory share an approach that social life is best understood by focusing on what people do – through embodied routines, material arrangements, and practical knowledge – instead of emphasising attitudes, intentions or individual decisions.
Ethnographic methods, with their emphasis on participants and “being there”, suit studies informed by practice theory particularly well. To study practices best one needs to be where they manifest, to focus on the observable material doings, noticing routines, tensions and everyday dynamics that surveys and interviews alone cannot capture. Theories of practice also strongly acknowledge the significance of the material objects and infrastructures in mediating, constituting and reproducing practices – which makes a site organized around the movement of material objects a fitting location for practice theoretical fieldwork.
Michal Sedličko writes about the friction between adhering to the ontology consistent with theories of practice while conducting ethnographic research (Sedličko 2017). He offers four main principles:
focus on what people actually do (and what materials they converse with) – attention to actual doing, attention to interactions and sequences (as opposed to single actions or statements), attention to matter in these interactions;
focus on everydayness – attention to sites and situatedness of practice, attention to the aspects of social reality taken for granted by the practitioners, problematising the accounts used by the practitioners to make sense of the situation;
focus on assembling, structuring and ordering – action to the ongoing achievement of assembling (stabilising, structuring and ordering), attention to the multiplicities, resistances, conflicts, breakdowns and ruptures emerging and being overcome through assembling, attention to the historical and situational productivity of such assemblages,
and focus on reflexivity.

Following Warde's (2005) argument that consumption is best understood as a moment within practices rather than a practice in itself, the focus in this thesis is on circulation of household goods – the ongoing movement of things through domestic life through acquisition, storage, care, and divestment – with Brīvbode as a site where several of these practice moments converge and become visible and acknowledged within a specific non-monetary mode of exchange. Brīvbode is, in Nicolini's (2017: 28) terms, a nexus: "a scene of action where several practices intersect and are knotted together."

3.2. The site
Brīvbode is a volunteer-run swapshop located in the Lastādija creative quarter in Riga, Latvia, adjacent to the Central Market and the tower of the Academy of Sciences – the more central part of a neighbourhood formerly known as Moscow forstadt.  The premises are situated on the ground floor of a two-storey wooden building facing Purvīša Street.
Lastādija quarter is run by Free Riga, a platform for creative and social initiatives for temporary use of vacant properties and territories in Riga, active since 2013. It consists of several wooden buildings, a yard, and a former workshop building which was first acquired for use by Free Riga in 2015, offering space to various NGOs and events. Over the following years the quarter expanded gradually; the properties were bought by Linstow Baltic, an international real estate company, which reached an agreement with Free Riga for continued temporary use of the area – an arrangement that has now lasted nearly a decade. This model of temporary use is one of the main pre-requisites for running a site like Brīvbode that stands outside the formal economy: both currently active Brīvbode venues in Riga are located in buildings managed by Free Riga, and the swapshops can use the spaces and sustain themselves by covering utility costs only.
The quarter has developed an uncommercial, DIY spirit that both shapes and is shaped by the character of the initiatives operating within it. Lastādija offers affordable residencies and workshop spaces to organisations, artisans, and individuals with creative and social initiatives. In exchange, residents contribute a number of volunteer hours to the quarter – collective work in the yard, various renovation tasks, event organization etc. The residents, workers, and regular visitors of the quarter also form one segment of Brīvbode's clientele, and the swapshop is open during quarter public events, however, many visitors come from a wider public who would not attend such events and are drawn instead by the practical offer of circulation of goods.
While formally linked to Free Riga, Brīvbode has for more than seven years operated as a relatively autonomous informal structure. Brīvbode in Lastādija is open twice per week, every Thursday and Friday from noon to seven in the evening. Additionally, it operates on the first Sunday of the month to cater to visitors who might not be able to attend on working days. In the past years, Brīvbode has also travelled to various events, participating with a stand, e.g. in the Song and Dance festival, various fairs, Riga city festival, Positivus etc.
[For most of these years (not since the very beginning)] Brīvbode has been coordinated by [Alise], a woman in her thirties with a background in the cultural sector and a wide network of contacts among Riga's creatives. A stable team of volunteers cover the shifts: every opening day has a day manager and helpers who assist on a more flexible basis. Alise manages Thursdays, and [Linards] – a resident of the quarter – covers Fridays, fulfilling his volunteer hour obligation in this way.
For the first five years Brīvbode in Lastādija operated mainly in two public rooms: an entry room with a sorting table, large brackets holding dozens of hangers and some open boxes and shelves with household items, books and clothing, and a smaller room dedicated to kids’ stuff – clothing, shoes, outdoor wear, toys and books, occasional kickbikes, carseats and strollers, altogether around 40 square meters.
In spring 2024 Brīvbode expanded into two additional rooms, almost doubling in size – adding a room with books and women’s clothing with a large round table for meetings, and another one with clothing and footwear for men and women, a new DIY heating system, as well as a fitting room. The expansion changed what was possible at the swapshop – more space for more people, events and, consequently – more stuff.
The range of stuff that can be found at the swapshop – cosmetics, jewelry, crafts supplies, house appliances – dishes, cutlery, pans and pots, lamps, occasional electronics, photographs, magazines. Most of the things travel quickly and the turnover is often observable on the spot right away.
The specific concept of Brīvbode – and the meaning attached to freecycling in this format – has travelled to Riga together with Alise, as she adopted it from an organisation she had volunteered at in Berlin. There she experienced the swapshop primarily as a meeting point for neighbours:
"I noticed the local neighbours, the regulars who were actually the ones who maintained the liveliness and the friendly, familiar (čomisko – lit. buddy-like, I.L.) atmosphere. In a supermarket you won't have that kind of familiar atmosphere – someone comes in once a month or so, you don't know them at all, the relations are cold, but there it was like a library where people also come in simply to talk. Because I saw that it can be like that in Berlin, I hoped it would happen here too." (Interview in March 2024)

Brīvbode is also not the only space of its kind in Riga or in Latvia. Several swapshop-style initiatives operate in other Latvian towns – Alūksne, Liepāja, Preiļi – independently and some under the same name, though typically on an event basis rather than as permanent venues. In addition to regular opening hours at the Lastādija venue, Brīvbode participates with stands at various fairs and festivals, usually promoting a vision of sustainable consumption.
Various exchange, divestment and second hand alternatives are currently available and are routinely used by people in Riga – online groups, charity shops and textile containers – but what sets Brīvbode apart is the operation on a physical site, the free exchange without regulated monetary transaction, and a sustained volunteer infrastructure that makes repeated visits possible and socially meaningful. It is open every week, year-round, and this regularity is central to what it offers — a route for acquisition and divestment, but also a predictable rhythm that participants can build into their everyday routines.

3.3. Data collection
3.3.1. Participant observation
[Maarja – Please start the section by first defining what is participant observation using methodological literature. Throughout the chapter you should support your narrative with methodological literature.]
I started the fieldwork for this thesis by volunteering in Brīvbode in February 2024, joining the weekly shifts for a couple of hours in the beginning. This role was not entirely unfamiliar to me – for several months in summer 2021 I worked at a Brīvbode pop-up venue in the Āgenskalns neighbourhood during the Covid-19 pandemic. The visiting experience differed back then as visitors were required to book time slots in advance due to gathering restrictions. The experience of material flows that were part of Brīvbode stayed with me –
both the intensity of accumulation and of objects getting stuck, the gradual familiarisation with the regular visitors and their habits and preferences, the physical effort of managing what came in and what needed to go out of the swapshop (e.g. using my cargo bike to take the ever growing number of unusable clothing bags to the textile recycling bins). I still cherish certain clothing and household items that remained in my household collection as favourites from that time.
Even though the principles are similar, each Brīvbode location has its specifics, and over the months of fieldwork – usually my weekly shifts in Lastādija – I renewed my competence in managing the flow of materials, evaluating and sorting donations, tidying, moving objects, witnessing and mediating occasional tensions in the shop. I took fieldnotes during and after visits, and occasionally photographed the space and its contents. Also, continuously handling material objects is a kind of activity that eases conversation; sorting alongside someone, or commenting together on an object, easily opens exchanges, and I used opportunities to chat with fellow volunteers and visitors.
Consequently, I paid more attention to public discussions e.g. among friends, family and on social media when people shared their habits, practices, uncertainties and frustrations, and I have occasionally used them as secondary sources.
[Maarja – Add a bit more detail, for example how long did the fieldwork last?]

3.3.2. Interviews
During my fieldwork, I conducted 15 interviews with Brīvbode visitors and volunteers – ten longer interviews between 60 and 90 minutes, and five shorter conversations between 20 and 45 minutes in length, part conducted on-site without prior arrangement. My first interview was with Alise – the founder of Brīvbode and a key person in the field with a true talent for connecting with visitors. Being familiar with many of their stories, she introduced me to some of the visitors, others I approached during my volunteering hours. Participants included both long-term visitors who had witnessed changes in the venue over the years, as well as novices.
Most research participants and the majority of practitioners in Brīvbode are women which partly reflects the gendered participation in the practice and the division of consumption work.
Although not exclusively so – men do visit Brīvbode and often have different practice trajectories – e.g. sellers of used books, electronics, collectors of CD’s, DVD’s and vinils —- so it is a limitation.
There is a lot less men’s clothing in Brīvbode. Standards to assess men’s clothing differ — as it is assumed men use clothing for work. Attempts to interview regular male visitors – one was not used in the corpus because the interview was not usable due to… —, another because the initially recruited participant pulled out his participation.
Two of the interviewees were men – one volunteer, and one a partner of a regular visitor who himself is not a direct swapshop user – he was chosen to draw on the theme of domestic consumption work and the division of this labour within households.
Some of the interviews in summer 2024 were conducted on site, in the yard of the swapshop. On several occasions, when the weather allowed it, I set up a table outdoors and invited visitors to sit for a conversation right after their visits. Following the principle that things are constitutive of practices, I used it as an opportunity to ask about their acquisitions and divestments during the visit, as well as their favourite and memorable objects acquired in Brīvbode as prompts to uncover material-practice relations [e.g. Mesiranta et al. 2023 – Circular consumption practices as matters of care]. This also corresponds to how Appadurai speaks of “methodological fetishism” [reference] with regards to returning our attention to the things themselves.
I also interviewed volunteers for longer conversations without interruption outside their working hours – some in Brīvbode, others in cafes. Later two of the interviews were conducted in visitors’ homes, thus offering an opportunity to observe household storage and divestment infrastructure and talk about the circulation histories of specific objects in their domestic environment.
The interviews were guided by a semi-structured guide organized around three themes: participants' practices of acquisition and divestment, their relationship to the objects they brought and took, and the social and material dimensions of their participation in Brīvbode. Rather than asking directly about attitudes or motivations, questions were designed to elicit accounts of what people actually do – how they choose what to bring, what routes objects take through their households, who does the work of sorting and transporting, and what the process of letting go feels like. Following the principles of practice-theoretical methods, the questions sought to access the practical, embodied, and often taken-for-granted dimensions of household goods circulation: the routines, competencies, and emotional labor involved in managing the flow of things. Where questions touched on values and motivations, these were treated not as explanations for behavior but as part of the meanings participants attach to their practices – an element among materials, competencies, and social arrangements in shaping how circulation is organized and reproduced.
I also drew on a technique Nicolini (2009) calls the interview with the double – asking participants how they would describe “freecycling” to a friend who is not familiar with the concept, which, as Nicolini notes (2009: page number) tends to produce “the going concerns which orient the conduct of the members and the normative and moral dimension of practice”.
Interviews were conducted in Latvian, and Russian on one occasion and recorded with participant consent.

 Diary
Throughout the fieldwork period I kept a diary for documenting and describing the circulation of goods in my own household – what arrived, what left, by what routes and in what practice sequences, I noted the spatial and temporal contexts for these practices, as well as the related meanings, uncertainties and frustrations.
The diary gave me space to express and make visible the mundane consumption, divestment work and care work around household objects – reviewing, evaluating and sorting children’s clothes, the early morning moments of browsing second hand portals as an enactment of care for others, the frustration with clutter and the pull of something on Brīvbode shelves, as well as thoughts about aspiring to be a good circular consumer. I treated these reflections as data, and keeping a diary allowed me to reflect on the circulation patterns in my household and to be cautious about my interpretations of what I observed in the field.
Overall, I have been and am sympathetic to the Brīvbode initiative and to the people who sustain it. This sympathy is productive – it gives me access, a certain ease of rapport, and insider understanding, while it also carries some risks. I have tried to address this by carefully attending to friction, tension, and contradiction in my data: the tensions around divestment of things from Brīvbode, the gap between Brīvbode's ideal social function and the quieter, less communal reality of many visits [more].
[Also, taking Brīvbode as my research guides/thinking about ways my research could also be useful to them – e.g. asking what questions they would be interested in being studied in more detail – one suggestion was exploring the exchange networks that go beyond the visitors, making the network of beneficiaries a lot wider.]
3.4. Data analysis
All interviews were transcribed and coded thematically on QCAmap, a web based service for qualitative content analysis. Coding was informed by practice-theoretical concepts.
attending to moments of friction,

3.5. Research ethics
Participants are identified by pseudonym. Where details might identify participants to people who know them, I have adjusted or omitted them – [although some of the participants are more difficult to anonymise, e.g. the day managers Alise and Linards]. My role as a volunteer at times gave me a degree of association with Brīvbode that shaped how some visitors related to me. For example, several regular visitors who usually take larger quantities of items were outright reluctant about the idea of being interviewed; I respected this without pressing, maintaining appropriate distance.


PIEVIENOT
stories/biographies of things
intensity of circulation
notions of ownership and value; moral economy
exchange relations – rich material
Semi-structured interviews (piemērs): As alluded to previously, the interview embraced a semi-structured format which combined a flexible and open-ended style of questioning, following a pre-established topic guide (Rubin and Rubin, 2012). Based on the information given during interviews, participants were classed as either beginner swapper (attended less than two events), advanced swapper (attended between three and ve swap events) and experienced swapper (attended over six events). This is because expertise is relevant for understanding practices (Shove et al., 2012).
In addition, the researcher encouraged participants to discuss“disposal channels” that are available to them and why swapping is selected over other channels.
The interviews were centred around the topic of swapping, firstly enquiring about their swapping experiences, followed by questions surrounding voluntary disposition via swapping. Consumers were probed on the type of clothing brought to swaps, how clothing was selected prior to swap attendance, and why particular clothing was picked over others.



Pievienot:
“Relational-material exchanges play out better as an embodied co-presence with others/things (e.g. handling objects, trying things before deciding to adopt them). Theoretically, an object of a decent quality will eventually get ‘adopted’ in time. But this cannot happen if free markets have to clear out of a temporary location after a few hours, rendering the clearing up/out of unwanted leftovers a major problem. This is compounded by the lack of a permanent rent-free storage space for SRRFM and TnT, which inadvertently implies that waste (i.e. unclaimed items) is ironically created after an activity that is supposed to curtail waste production.”
“Pinning down the actual practice and its scale, identifying overlaps with other practices or deciding which actions belong to which practice registers as a tricky task, further complicated by the fact that practices change over time.” (Sedlačko, 2017: 53)









